README.markdown, before:

 The Võro morphology and tools / Võro keeleoppus ja -tüüriistaq
================================================================

This directory contains source files for the Võro language morphology
and dictionary. The data and implementation are licenced under __LICENCE__
licence also detailed in the LICENCE file of this directory. The authors named
in the AUTHORS file are available to grant other licencing choices.

Installation and compilation, and a short note on usage, is documented in the
file INSTALL.

Documentation can be found here:

* https://giellalt.uit.no/lang/vro/VoroDocumentation.html (analyser)
* https://giellalt.uit.no/index.html (infrastructure)

Requirements
------------

In order to compile and use Võro language morphology and dictionaries,
you need:

* Xerox Finite-State Morphology tools, or
* Helsinki Finite-State Technology library and tools, version 3.8 or newer, or
* Foma finite-state tool

Optionally:

* VislCG3 Constraint Grammar tools

Downloading
-----------

The Võro language sources can be acquired using `giella SVN
repository <https://giellalt.uit.no/infra/anonymous-svn.html>`_, from the
language specific directory, after the core has been downloaded and initial
setup has been performed.

Installation
------------

INSTALL describes the GNU build system in detail, but for most users the usual:

	./configure
	make
	(as root) make install

should result in a local installation and::

	(as root) make uninstall

in its uninstallation.

If you would rather install in e.g. your home directory
(or aren't the system administrator), you can tell ./configure::

    ./configure --prefix=$HOME

If you are checking out the development versions from SVN you must first create
and install the necessary autotools files from the host system, and check that
your environment is correctly set up. This is done by doing:

  ./autogen.sh

It is common practice to keep `generated files out of version control
<http://www.gnu.org/software/automake/manual/automake.html#CVS>`_.

VPATH builds
------------

If you want to keep the source code tree clean, a VPATH build is the solution.
The idea is to create a build dir somewhere outside of the source code tree,
and call `configure` from there. Here is one VPATH variant of the standard
procedure:

	mkdir build && cd build
	../configure
	make
	(as root) make install

This will keep all the generated files within the build/ dir, and keep the src/
dir (mostly) free of generated files. If you are building from the development
version in SVN, you must run the ./autogen.sh script BEFORE you take the steps
above.

For further installation instruction refer to file ``INSTALL``, which contains
the standard installation instructions for GNU autoconf based software.

Commit message:

[Template merge] Add license badge

README.markdown, after:

 The Võro morphology and tools / Võro keeleoppus ja -tüüriistaq
================================================================

This directory contains source files for the Võro language morphology
and dictionary. The data and implementation are licenced under __LICENCE__
licence also detailed in the LICENCE file of this directory. The authors named
in the AUTHORS file are available to grant other licencing choices.

[![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues-raw/giellalt/lang-vro)](https://github.com/giellalt/lang-vro/issues)
[![Build Status](https://github.com/giellalt/lang-vro/workflows/Build%20Speller%20Archives%20and%20Bundles/badge.svg)](https://github.com/giellalt/lang-vro/actions)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/giellalt/template-lang-vro)](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/giellalt/lang-vro/develop/LICENSE)

Install proofing tools and [keyboards](https://github.com/giellalt/keyboard-vro)
for the Võro language by using the [Divvun Installer](http://divvun.no)
(some languages are only available via the nightly channel).

Documentation can be found here:

* https://giellalt.uit.no/lang/vro/VoroDocumentation.html (analyser)
* https://giellalt.uit.no/index.html (infrastructure)

Requirements
------------

In order to compile and use Võro language morphology and dictionaries,
you need:

* Xerox Finite-State Morphology tools, or
* Helsinki Finite-State Technology library and tools, version 3.8 or newer, or
* Foma finite-state tool

Optionally:

* VislCG3 Constraint Grammar tools

Downloading
-----------

The Võro language sources can be acquired using `giella SVN
repository <https://giellalt.uit.no/infra/anonymous-svn.html>`_, from the
language specific directory, after the core has been downloaded and initial
setup has been performed.

Installation
------------

INSTALL describes the GNU build system in detail, but for most users the usual:

	./configure
	make
	(as root) make install

should result in a local installation and::

	(as root) make uninstall

in its uninstallation.

If you would rather install in e.g. your home directory
(or aren't the system administrator), you can tell ./configure::

    ./configure --prefix=$HOME

If you are checking out the development versions from SVN you must first create
and install the necessary autotools files from the host system, and check that
your environment is correctly set up. This is done by doing:

  ./autogen.sh

It is common practice to keep `generated files out of version control
<http://www.gnu.org/software/automake/manual/automake.html#CVS>`_.

VPATH builds
------------

If you want to keep the source code tree clean, a VPATH build is the solution.
The idea is to create a build dir somewhere outside of the source code tree,
and call `configure` from there. Here is one VPATH variant of the standard
procedure:

	mkdir build && cd build
	../configure
	make
	(as root) make install

This will keep all the generated files within the build/ dir, and keep the src/
dir (mostly) free of generated files. If you are building from the development
version in SVN, you must run the ./autogen.sh script BEFORE you take the steps
above.

For further installation instruction refer to file ``INSTALL``, which contains
the standard installation instructions for GNU autoconf based software.
