docs/root-morphology.md, before:


# Võru tags and basic lexica

# Definitions for Multichar_Symbols

## Analysis symbols
The morphological analyses of wordforms for the Võro
language are presented in this system in terms of the following symbols.
(It is highly suggested to follow existing standards when adding new tags).

 * **+WORK** (eng) work needed 
special letters, cf. https://github.com/hfst/hfst/issues/497 Trond.

 * **u̬** u plus U+032C COMBINING CARON BELOW
 * **U̬** u plus U+032C COMBINING CARON BELOW
 * **ü̬** ü plus U+032C COMBINING CARON BELOW
 * **Ü̬** ü plus U+032C COMBINING CARON BELOW
 * **i̬** i plus U+032C COMBINING CARON BELOW
 * **I̬** i plus U+032C COMBINING CARON BELOW
 * **õ̭** õ plus U+032D COMBINING CIRCUMFLEX ACCENT BELOW
 * **Õ̭** õ plus U+032D COMBINING CIRCUMFLEX ACCENT BELOW
 ```%{ˋØ%} - U+02CB MODIFIER LETTER GRAVE ACCENT used in rules```

The parts-of-speech are:
 * **+N	** Noun
 * **+A	** Adjective
 * **+Adv** Adverb
 * **+V	** Verb

 * **+Pron** Pronoun
 * **+CS	** subjunction
 * **+CC	** Correlating conjunction
 * **+Det** Determiners
 * **+Adp** Adpositions
 * **+Po	** Postposition
 * **+Pr	** Preposition
 * **+Interj** Interjections
 * **+Pcle**
 * **+Num** Numerals
 * **+Qnt**

The parts of speech are further split up into:

 * **+Prop**
 * **+Pers**
 * **+Dem**
 * **+Interr**
 * **+Refl**
 * **+Recipr**
 * **+Rel**
 * **+Indef**
 * **+AdA** adjective or adverb modifier

The Usage extents are marked using following tags:
 * **+Err/Orth**
 * **+Err/Orth-no-pal** palatalization is missing
 * **+Err/Orth-no-q	** Q is missing
 * **+Use/-Spell**
 * **+Use/NG** No generation

The nominals are inflected in the following Case and Number
 * **+Sg** Singular
 * **+Pl** Plural
 * **+SP** Singular and Plural, used for CG and Apertium

 * **+Abe** abessive
 * **+Abl** ablative
 * **+Acc** accusative
 * **+Ade** adessive
 * **+All** allative
 * **+Com** comitative
 * **+Com/Sh**
 * **+Ela** elative
 * **+Ess** essive
 * **+Ill** illative
 * **+Ine** inessive
 * **+Gen** genitive
 * **+Loc** locative
 * **+Nom** nominative
 * **+Par** partitive
 * **+Ter** terminative
 * **+Tra** translative



The possession is marked as such:
There are no possessive markers

The comparative forms are:
 * **+Comp**
 * **+Superl**
Numerals are classified under:
 * **+Attr**
 * **+Card**
 * **+Ord**
Verb moods are:
 * **+Ind**
 * **+Jus**
 * **+Prs**
 * **+Prt**
 * **+Pot**
 * **+Cond**
 * **+Imprt**

Verb personal forms are:

Subject conjugation

 * **+Sg1**
 * **+Sg2**
 * **+Sg3**
 * **+Pl1**
 * **+Pl2**
 * **+Pl3**

 * **+ScSg1**
 * **+ScSg2**
 * **+ScSg3**
 * **+ScPl1**
 * **+ScPl2**
 * **+ScPl3**
 * **+Sc	**

Passive conjugation

 * **+PcSg1**
 * **+PcSg2**
 * **+PcSg3**
 * **+PcPl1**
 * **+PcPl2**
 * **+PcPl3**
 * **+Pc	**
Other verb forms are
 * **+Inf	** sõimadaq, elädäq
 * **+Inf/mA	** sõimama, elämä
 * **+Ger		** ollõn
 * **+ConNeg		** saa eiq 3 elements in 2 orthographic units
 * **+ConNegII	** ei saaq 3 elements in 2 orthographic units
 * **+Neg		** saa-aiq 3 elements in 1 orthographic unit
 * **+ImprtII	**
 * **+PrsPrc		**
 * **+PrfPrc		**
 * **+Sup		** olõman, olõmaldaq; oldama
 * **+VGen		**
 * **+VAbess		**
 * **+Act** active
 * **+Pss** passive
 * **+PrsPrc	**
 * **+PrfPrc** elet

 * **+ABBR**
 * +Symbol = independent symbols in the text stream, like £, €, ©
 * **+ACR**
 * **+Acro**

Special symbols are classified with:
 * **+CLB**
 * **+PUNCT**
 * **+LEFT**
 * **+RIGHT**
The verbs are syntactically split according to transitivity:
 * **+TV**
 * **+IV**
Special multiword units are analysed with:
 * **+Multi**
Non-dictionary words can be recognised with:
 * **+Guess**

Question and Focus particles:

 * **+Qst**
 * **+Foc**
 * **+Clt	**

 * **+Hom1	**
 * **+Hom2	**
 * **+Hom3	**
 * **+Hom4	**




### Tags distinguishing different versions of the same lemma (before POS)
 * +v1
 * +v2
 * +v3
 * +v4
 * +v5
 * +v6
 * +v7
 * +v8
 * +v9
 * +v10
 * +v11
 * +v12
 * +v13
 * +v14
 * +v15
 * +v16
 * +v17
 * +v18
 * +v19
 * +v20
 * +v21
 * +v22
 * +v23
 * +v24



 * **+Sem/Act** Activity
 * **+Sem/Amount** Amount
 * **+Sem/Ani** Animate
 * **+Sem/Aniprod** Animal Product
 * **+Sem/Body** Bodypart
 * **+Sem/Body-abstr** siellu, vuoig?a, jierbmi
 * **+Sem/Build** Building
 * **+Sem/Build-part** Part of Bulding, like the closet
 * **+Sem/Cat** Category
 * **+Sem/Clth** Clothes
 * **+Sem/Clth-jewl** Jewelery
 * **+Sem/Clth-part** part of clothes, boallu, sávdnji...
 * **+Sem/Ctain** Container
 * **+Sem/Ctain-abstr** Abstract container like bank account
 * **+Sem/Ctain-clth**
 * **+Sem/Curr** Currency like dollár, Not Money
 * **+Sem/Dance** Dance
 * **+Sem/Dir** Direction like GPS-kursa
 * **+Sem/Domain** Domain like politics, reindeerherding (a system of actions)
 * **+Sem/Drink** Drink
 * **+Sem/Dummytag** Dummytag
 * **+Sem/Edu** Educational event
 * **+Sem/Event** Event
 * **+Sem/Feat** Feature, like Árvu
 * **+Sem/Feat-phys** Physiological feature, ivdni, fárda
 * **+Sem/Feat-psych** Psychological feauture
 * **+Sem/Feat-measr** Psychological feauture
 * **+Sem/Fem** Female name
 * **+Sem/Food** Food
 * **+Sem/Food-med** Medicine
 * **+Sem/Furn** Furniture
 * **+Sem/Game** Game
 * **+Sem/Geom** Geometrical object
 * **+Sem/Group** Animal or Human Group
 * **+Sem/Hum** Human
 * **+Sem/Hum-abstr** Human abstract
 * **+Sem/Ideol** Ideology
 * **+Sem/Lang** Language
 * **+Sem/Mal** Male name
 * **+Sem/Mat** Material for producing things
 * **+Sem/Measr** Measure
 * **+Sem/Money** Has to do with money, like wages, not Curr(ency)
 * **+Sem/Obj** Object
 * **+Sem/Obj-clo** Cloth
 * **+Sem/Obj-cogn** Cloth
 * **+Sem/Obj-el** (Electrical) machine or apparatus
 * **+Sem/Obj-ling** Object with something written on it
 * **+Sem/Obj-rope** flexible ropelike object
 * **+Sem/Obj-surfc** Surface object
 * **+Sem/Org** Organisation
 * **+Sem/Part** Feature, oassi, bealli
 * **+Sem/Perc-cogn** Cognative perception
 * **+Sem/Perc-emo** Emotional perception
 * **+Sem/Perc-phys** Physical perception
 * **+Sem/Perc-psych** Physical perception
 * **+Sem/Plant** Plant
 * **+Sem/Plant-part** Plant part
 * **+Sem/Plc** Place
 * **+Sem/Plc-abstr** Abstract place
 * **+Sem/Plc-elevate** Place
 * **+Sem/Plc-line** Place
 * **+Sem/Plc-water** Place
 * **+Sem/Pos** Position (as in social position job)
 * **+Sem/Process** Process
 * **+Sem/Prod** Product
 * **+Sem/Prod-audio** Audio product
 * **+Sem/Prod-cogn** Cognition product
 * **+Sem/Prod-ling** Linguistic product
 * **+Sem/Prod-vis** Visual product
 * **+Sem/Rel** Relation
 * **+Sem/Route** Name of a Route
 * **+Sem/Rule** Rule or convention
 * **+Sem/Semcon** Semantic concept
 * **+Sem/Sign** Sign (e.g. numbers, punctuation) 
 * **+Sem/Sport** Sport
 * **+Sem/State** 
 * **+Sem/State-sick** Illness
 * **+Sem/Substnc** Substance, like Air and Water
 * **+Sem/Sur** Surname
 * **+Sem/Symbol** Symbol
 * **+Sem/Time** Time
 * **+Sem/Tool** Prototypical tool for repairing things
 * **+Sem/Tool-catch** Tool used for catching (e.g. fish)
 * **+Sem/Tool-clean** Tool used for cleaning
 * **+Sem/Tool-it** Tool used in IT
 * **+Sem/Tool-measr** Tool used for measuring
 * **+Sem/Tool-music** Music instrument
 * **+Sem/Tool-write** Writing tool
 * **+Sem/Txt** Text (girji, lávlla...)
 * **+Sem/Veh** Vehicle
 * **+Sem/Wpn** Weapon
 * **+Sem/Wthr** The Weather or the state of ground





 * __+Sem/Ant_Fem	__
 * __+Sem/Ant_Mal	__
 * **+Temp	**


Derivations are classified under the morphophonetic form of the suffix, the
source and target part-of-speech.
 * **+V→N	**
 * **+V→V	**
 * **+V→A	**
 * **+Prop→A	**
 * **+Der	**
 * **+Der/xxx**
 **+Der/JA**	NomAg
 **+Der/minE** NomAct
 **+Der/lt	** A→Adv

# Morphophonology
To represent phonologic variations in word forms we use the following
symbols in the lexicon files:
```
  %{aä%}    — Vowel harmony with "(t)a/ä" AÄ1:a AÄ1:ä AÄ1:0
  %{ae%}   — Vowel harmony with "a/e/õ" passive tahetu
  %{aõ%}   — Vowel harmony with "a/e/õ" passive sõidõtu
  %{äe%}    — Vowel harmony with "ä/e/õ" passive
  %{eõ%}    — Vowel harmony with "e/õ"
  %{uü%}    — Vowel harmony with "u/ü"
  %{öü%}    — Vowel raising
  %{ou%}    — Vowel raising
  %{ei%}    — Vowel raising
  %{õy%}    — Vowel raising
  %{ao%}    — Vowel raising
  %{eØ%}    — ütlemä:üt%{eØ%}l  
  %{õØ%}    — ütlemä:üt%{eØ%}l  
  %{Øõ%}    — juurdlõma:juur%{dØ%}%{0õ%}l
  %{XV%}    — This is used for echoing the previous vowel
  %{XC%}    — This is used for lengthening a consonant
  %{dØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{tØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{dv%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{ij%}    ellä%{ij%}
  %{gv%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{gl%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{gØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas argnõma:ar%{gØ%}
  %{uv%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{üv%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
```


## Gemination
```
  %{hØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{jØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{kØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{lØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{mØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{nØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{pØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas oppama:o%{pØ%}pama
  %{rØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{sØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{vØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{Øp%}    — häbü:hä%{Øp%}%{pbØ%}ü
  %{Øt%}    — koda:ko%{Øt%}%{tdØ%}a
  %{Øk%}    — nägo:nä%{Øk%}%{kgØ%}o

```

## Strong and weak
```
  %{pb%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{td%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{t́d́%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{kg%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{bv%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas närväs:när%{bv%}ä%{sØ%}
  %{dr%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas parras:par%{dr%}a%{sØ%}
  %{bm%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas lammas:lam%{bm%}a%{sØ%}
  %{dn%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas lammas:lam%{bm%}a%{sØ%}
  %{dl%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas lammas:lam%{bm%}a%{sØ%}
  %{pbØ%}   — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{pbv%}   — tõbi: tõvõ tõpõ tõppõ
  %{tdØ%}   — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{kgØ%}   — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{jiØ%}   — HJK and KimmoK ideas vari:var%{jiØ%}o
  %{qmn%}   — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{qn%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{dd́Ø%}   
  %{dd́n%}   
  %{dd́r%}   
  %{dd́v%}   
  %{dd́Ø%}   
  %{gǵv%}   
  %{gǵØ%}   
  %{tt́d%}   
  %{tt́Ø%}    täh%{tt́Ø%}
  %{kḱg%}   
  %{kḱØ%}   
  %{pṕb%}   
  %{pṕØ%}   

```

## Palatalization
```
  %{bb́%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{dd́%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{ff́%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{gǵ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{hh́%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{kḱ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{lĺ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{mḿ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{nń%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{pṕ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{rŕ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{sś%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{tt́%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{vv́%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{zź%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{dd́n%}  
```

 **%^I7**  This appears in stem vaoma:va%^I7o for vaio
 **%^K7**  This appears in stem väemä:vä%^K7e for väkeq
 **%^V7**  This appears in stem häömä:hä%^V7ö for hävvü
 **%^T7**  This appears in stem kaoma:ka%^T7o for katoq
 **%^Y7**  This appears for syna = s%^Y7na and is rendered as õ in the norm

And following triggers to control variation
 %^ErrorBack	 +Err/Orth+Clt:%>kinaq in front harmony context BHARM disallowance

  %^CC2C 	 att%^CC2C%>m%{aä%} atma
  %^OO2Õ		  joo%^OO2Õ%>i:j0õ0%>i
  %^PSS		 vowel in passive tahetu, sõidõtu, eletü

  %^ÄI2ÄÄ  päiv%^ÄI2ÄÄ%>ä: päävä
  %{PrsSg1%}  — this helps with %{eõ%}:i̬

 %^StrD2T  This changes g,d,b, => k,t,p

 **%^VowRM** this will remove stem final vowel
 **%^CnsRM** this will remove stem final consonant tervüs:tervü
 **%^StrGStem** This strengthens "perädü" to "perätüt"
 **%^XStrGStem** This extra-strengthens "sõda" to "sõtta"
  **%^NoGrad**
 **%^WGStem** This weakens
  %^G1	       — This is used with %{pØ%} %{pbØ%} for 0 0, also t, k
  %^G2	       — This is used with %{pØ%} %{pbØ%} for 0 b, also t, k
  %^G3	       — This is used with %{pØ%} %{pbØ%} for 0 p, also t, k
  %^G4	       — This is used with %{pØ%} %{pbØ%} for p p, also t, k
  %^Pen	       This moves us to penultimate coda
  %^PAL	       — Palatalization
  %^NoPAL       — NoPalatalization

 %^PenWGStem  This weakens "kipõń" to "kibõna"

 **%^PenVowRM** syncope tapõld : taplõma

 **%^D2S	** käsi, susi
 %^TS2S  The -ts- => -s-
 %^I2J  The i => j change

 **%^PLPRT** The a:o attested in Plural kana:kanno and prt
 **%^VOWRaise** Raises vowel
 **%^VOWLower** Lowers vowel
 **%^XLowerVow** Lowers vowel two levels
 **%^VOWLowerDelab** Lowers vowel and delabializes it
 **%^XLowerVowDelab** Lowers vowel two levels and delabializes it
 %^U2E  lowers u:õ and ü:e delabializes and lowers
 %^U2A  lowers u:a and ü:ä delabializes and lowers

* **+Gram/TAbbr**:  Transitive abbreviation (it needs an argument)
* **+Gram/NoAbbr**:  Intransitive abbreviations that are homonymous
   with more frequent words. They should only be considered
   abbreviations in the middle of a sentence.
* **+Gram/TNumAbbr**:  Transitive abbreviation if the following
            constituent is numeric
* **+Gram/NumNoAbbr**:  Transitive abbreviations for which numerals
are complements and normal words. The abbreviation usage
is less common and thus only the occurences in the middle of
the sentence can be considered as true cases.
* **+Gram/TIAbbr**:  Both transitive and intransitive abbreviation
* **+Gram/IAbbr**:  Intransitive abbreviation (it takes no argument)
* **+Gram/3syll**: trisyllabic verbs
 ; +Gram/Superl 
 ; +Gram/Comp 



# Oahpa Place names and case used 
* **+%<plc_ine%>**:  Ine, Ill, Ela
* **+%<plc_ade%>**:  Ade, All, Abl
* **+%<pcl_pääl%>**:  pääl, pääle, päält


# Flag diacritics
We have manually optimised the structure of our lexicon using the following
flag diacritics to restrict morhpological combinatorics - only allow
compounds with verbs if the verb is further derived into a noun again:
|  **@P.NeedNoun.ON@** | (Dis)allow compounds with verbs unless nominalised
|  **@D.NeedNoun.ON@** | (Dis)allow compounds with verbs unless nominalised
|  **@C.NeedNoun@** | (Dis)allow compounds with verbs unless nominalised

For languages that allow compounding, the following flag diacritics are needed
to control position-based compounding restrictions for nominals. Their use is
handled automatically if combined with +CmpN/xxx tags. If not used, they will
do no harm.
|  **@P.CmpFrst.FALSE@** | Require that words tagged as such only appear first
|  **@D.CmpPref.TRUE@** | Block such words from entering ENDLEX
|  **@P.CmpPref.FALSE@** | Block these words from making further compounds
|  **@D.CmpLast.TRUE@** | Block such words from entering R
|  **@D.CmpNone.TRUE@** | Combines with the next tag to prohibit compounding
|  **@U.CmpNone.FALSE@** | Combines with the prev tag to prohibit compounding
|  **@P.CmpOnly.TRUE@** | Sets a flag to indicate that the word has passed R
|  **@D.CmpOnly.FALSE@** | Disallow words coming directly from root.

Use the following flag diacritics to control downcasing of derived proper
nouns (e.g. Finnish Pariisi -> pariisilainen). See e.g. North Sámi for how to use
these flags. There exists a ready-made regex that will do the actual down-casing
given the proper use of these flags.

|  **@U.Cap.Obl@** | Allowing downcasing of derived names: deatnulasj.
|  **@U.Cap.Opt@** | Allowing downcasing of derived names: deatnulasj.

|  **@U.Case.Abe@	** | Abessive
|  **@U.Case.Abl@	** | Ablative
|  **@U.Case.Ade@	** | Adessive
|  **@U.Case.All@	** | Allative
|  **@U.Case.Com@	** | Comitative
|  **@U.Case.Ela@	** | Elative
|  **@U.Case.Gen@	** | Genitive
|  **@U.Case.Ill@	** | Illative
|  **@U.Case.Ine@	** | Inessive
|  **@U.Case.Nom@	** | Nominative
|  **@U.Case.Par@	** | Partitive
|  **@U.Case.Ter@	** | Terminative
|  **@U.Case.Tra@	** | Translative

|  **@U.Number.Pl@	** | Plural
|  **@U.Number.Sg@	** | Singular

# The Root lexicon


The word forms in the Võro language start from the lexeme roots of basic
word classes, or optionally from prefixes:
 * **adpositions ;	**
 * **adverbs ;		**
 * **conjunctors ;	**
 * **interjections ;**
 * **pronouns	;		**
 * **PronounTypes	;		**
 * **Punctuation ;	**
 * **Symbols ;	**
 * **numerals	;	**
look at verb_newwords.lexc

 * **Exceptions ;		**
 * **Abbreviation ;	**
 * **Acronym ;**

Incoming
 * __A_NEWWORDS ;__
 * __ADP_NEWWORDS ;__
 * __ADV_NEWWORDS ;__ 
 * __DET_NEWWORDS ;__
 * __INTERJ_NEWWORDS ;__
 * __N_NEWWORDS ;__
 * __@U.Cap.Obl@ PROP_NEWWORDS ;__
 * __@U.Cap.Opt@ PROP_NEWWORDS ;__
 * __V_NEWWORDS ;__
 * **GenitiveAttributes ;** Borrowed from experimental_languages est



less complex word classes

Commit message:

New ^ShortGStem trigger and verbs in -hama
^ShortGStem trigger is used for orthographic shortening of stem-final consonant
before subsequent consonant, e.g. putma but simultaneously uskma.
here ^WGStem would result in the erroneous form usma

docs/root-morphology.md, after:


# Võru tags and basic lexica

# Definitions for Multichar_Symbols

## Analysis symbols
The morphological analyses of wordforms for the Võro
language are presented in this system in terms of the following symbols.
(It is highly suggested to follow existing standards when adding new tags).

 * **+WORK** (eng) work needed 
special letters, cf. https://github.com/hfst/hfst/issues/497 Trond.

 * **u̬** u plus U+032C COMBINING CARON BELOW
 * **U̬** u plus U+032C COMBINING CARON BELOW
 * **ü̬** ü plus U+032C COMBINING CARON BELOW
 * **Ü̬** ü plus U+032C COMBINING CARON BELOW
 * **i̬** i plus U+032C COMBINING CARON BELOW
 * **I̬** i plus U+032C COMBINING CARON BELOW
 * **õ̭** õ plus U+032D COMBINING CIRCUMFLEX ACCENT BELOW
 * **Õ̭** õ plus U+032D COMBINING CIRCUMFLEX ACCENT BELOW
 ```%{ˋØ%} - U+02CB MODIFIER LETTER GRAVE ACCENT used in rules```

The parts-of-speech are:
 * **+N	** Noun
 * **+A	** Adjective
 * **+Adv** Adverb
 * **+V	** Verb

 * **+Pron** Pronoun
 * **+CS	** subjunction
 * **+CC	** Correlating conjunction
 * **+Det** Determiners
 * **+Adp** Adpositions
 * **+Po	** Postposition
 * **+Pr	** Preposition
 * **+Interj** Interjections
 * **+Pcle**
 * **+Num** Numerals
 * **+Qnt**

The parts of speech are further split up into:

 * **+Prop**
 * **+Pers**
 * **+Dem**
 * **+Interr**
 * **+Refl**
 * **+Recipr**
 * **+Rel**
 * **+Indef**
 * **+AdA** adjective or adverb modifier

The Usage extents are marked using following tags:
 * **+Err/Orth**
 * **+Err/Orth-no-pal** palatalization is missing
 * **+Err/Orth-no-q	** Q is missing
 * **+Use/-Spell**
 * **+Use/NG** No generation

The nominals are inflected in the following Case and Number
 * **+Sg** Singular
 * **+Pl** Plural
 * **+SP** Singular and Plural, used for CG and Apertium

 * **+Abe** abessive
 * **+Abl** ablative
 * **+Acc** accusative
 * **+Ade** adessive
 * **+All** allative
 * **+Com** comitative
 * **+Com/Sh**
 * **+Ela** elative
 * **+Ess** essive
 * **+Ill** illative
 * **+Ine** inessive
 * **+Gen** genitive
 * **+Loc** locative
 * **+Nom** nominative
 * **+Par** partitive
 * **+Ter** terminative
 * **+Tra** translative



The possession is marked as such:
There are no possessive markers

The comparative forms are:
 * **+Comp**
 * **+Superl**
Numerals are classified under:
 * **+Attr**
 * **+Card**
 * **+Ord**
Verb moods are:
 * **+Ind**
 * **+Jus**
 * **+Prs**
 * **+Prt**
 * **+Pot**
 * **+Cond**
 * **+Imprt**

Verb personal forms are:

Subject conjugation

 * **+Sg1**
 * **+Sg2**
 * **+Sg3**
 * **+Pl1**
 * **+Pl2**
 * **+Pl3**

 * **+ScSg1**
 * **+ScSg2**
 * **+ScSg3**
 * **+ScPl1**
 * **+ScPl2**
 * **+ScPl3**
 * **+Sc	**

Passive conjugation

 * **+PcSg1**
 * **+PcSg2**
 * **+PcSg3**
 * **+PcPl1**
 * **+PcPl2**
 * **+PcPl3**
 * **+Pc	**
Other verb forms are
 * **+Inf	** sõimadaq, elädäq
 * **+Inf/mA	** sõimama, elämä
 * **+Ger		** ollõn
 * **+ConNeg		** saa eiq 3 elements in 2 orthographic units
 * **+ConNegII	** ei saaq 3 elements in 2 orthographic units
 * **+Neg		** saa-aiq 3 elements in 1 orthographic unit
 * **+ImprtII	**
 * **+PrsPrc		**
 * **+PrfPrc		**
 * **+Sup		** olõman, olõmaldaq; oldama
 * **+VGen		**
 * **+VAbess		**
 * **+Act** active
 * **+Pss** passive
 * **+PrsPrc	**
 * **+PrfPrc** elet

 * **+ABBR**
 * +Symbol = independent symbols in the text stream, like £, €, ©
 * **+ACR**
 * **+Acro**

Special symbols are classified with:
 * **+CLB**
 * **+PUNCT**
 * **+LEFT**
 * **+RIGHT**
The verbs are syntactically split according to transitivity:
 * **+TV**
 * **+IV**
Special multiword units are analysed with:
 * **+Multi**
Non-dictionary words can be recognised with:
 * **+Guess**

Question and Focus particles:

 * **+Qst**
 * **+Foc**
 * **+Clt	**

 * **+Hom1	**
 * **+Hom2	**
 * **+Hom3	**
 * **+Hom4	**




### Tags distinguishing different versions of the same lemma (before POS)
 * +v1
 * +v2
 * +v3
 * +v4
 * +v5
 * +v6
 * +v7
 * +v8
 * +v9
 * +v10
 * +v11
 * +v12
 * +v13
 * +v14
 * +v15
 * +v16
 * +v17
 * +v18
 * +v19
 * +v20
 * +v21
 * +v22
 * +v23
 * +v24



 * **+Sem/Act** Activity
 * **+Sem/Amount** Amount
 * **+Sem/Ani** Animate
 * **+Sem/Aniprod** Animal Product
 * **+Sem/Body** Bodypart
 * **+Sem/Body-abstr** siellu, vuoig?a, jierbmi
 * **+Sem/Build** Building
 * **+Sem/Build-part** Part of Bulding, like the closet
 * **+Sem/Cat** Category
 * **+Sem/Clth** Clothes
 * **+Sem/Clth-jewl** Jewelery
 * **+Sem/Clth-part** part of clothes, boallu, sávdnji...
 * **+Sem/Ctain** Container
 * **+Sem/Ctain-abstr** Abstract container like bank account
 * **+Sem/Ctain-clth**
 * **+Sem/Curr** Currency like dollár, Not Money
 * **+Sem/Dance** Dance
 * **+Sem/Dir** Direction like GPS-kursa
 * **+Sem/Domain** Domain like politics, reindeerherding (a system of actions)
 * **+Sem/Drink** Drink
 * **+Sem/Dummytag** Dummytag
 * **+Sem/Edu** Educational event
 * **+Sem/Event** Event
 * **+Sem/Feat** Feature, like Árvu
 * **+Sem/Feat-phys** Physiological feature, ivdni, fárda
 * **+Sem/Feat-psych** Psychological feauture
 * **+Sem/Feat-measr** Psychological feauture
 * **+Sem/Fem** Female name
 * **+Sem/Food** Food
 * **+Sem/Food-med** Medicine
 * **+Sem/Furn** Furniture
 * **+Sem/Game** Game
 * **+Sem/Geom** Geometrical object
 * **+Sem/Group** Animal or Human Group
 * **+Sem/Hum** Human
 * **+Sem/Hum-abstr** Human abstract
 * **+Sem/Ideol** Ideology
 * **+Sem/Lang** Language
 * **+Sem/Mal** Male name
 * **+Sem/Mat** Material for producing things
 * **+Sem/Measr** Measure
 * **+Sem/Money** Has to do with money, like wages, not Curr(ency)
 * **+Sem/Obj** Object
 * **+Sem/Obj-clo** Cloth
 * **+Sem/Obj-cogn** Cloth
 * **+Sem/Obj-el** (Electrical) machine or apparatus
 * **+Sem/Obj-ling** Object with something written on it
 * **+Sem/Obj-rope** flexible ropelike object
 * **+Sem/Obj-surfc** Surface object
 * **+Sem/Org** Organisation
 * **+Sem/Part** Feature, oassi, bealli
 * **+Sem/Perc-cogn** Cognative perception
 * **+Sem/Perc-emo** Emotional perception
 * **+Sem/Perc-phys** Physical perception
 * **+Sem/Perc-psych** Physical perception
 * **+Sem/Plant** Plant
 * **+Sem/Plant-part** Plant part
 * **+Sem/Plc** Place
 * **+Sem/Plc-abstr** Abstract place
 * **+Sem/Plc-elevate** Place
 * **+Sem/Plc-line** Place
 * **+Sem/Plc-water** Place
 * **+Sem/Pos** Position (as in social position job)
 * **+Sem/Process** Process
 * **+Sem/Prod** Product
 * **+Sem/Prod-audio** Audio product
 * **+Sem/Prod-cogn** Cognition product
 * **+Sem/Prod-ling** Linguistic product
 * **+Sem/Prod-vis** Visual product
 * **+Sem/Rel** Relation
 * **+Sem/Route** Name of a Route
 * **+Sem/Rule** Rule or convention
 * **+Sem/Semcon** Semantic concept
 * **+Sem/Sign** Sign (e.g. numbers, punctuation) 
 * **+Sem/Sport** Sport
 * **+Sem/State** 
 * **+Sem/State-sick** Illness
 * **+Sem/Substnc** Substance, like Air and Water
 * **+Sem/Sur** Surname
 * **+Sem/Symbol** Symbol
 * **+Sem/Time** Time
 * **+Sem/Tool** Prototypical tool for repairing things
 * **+Sem/Tool-catch** Tool used for catching (e.g. fish)
 * **+Sem/Tool-clean** Tool used for cleaning
 * **+Sem/Tool-it** Tool used in IT
 * **+Sem/Tool-measr** Tool used for measuring
 * **+Sem/Tool-music** Music instrument
 * **+Sem/Tool-write** Writing tool
 * **+Sem/Txt** Text (girji, lávlla...)
 * **+Sem/Veh** Vehicle
 * **+Sem/Wpn** Weapon
 * **+Sem/Wthr** The Weather or the state of ground





 * __+Sem/Ant_Fem	__
 * __+Sem/Ant_Mal	__
 * **+Temp	**


Derivations are classified under the morphophonetic form of the suffix, the
source and target part-of-speech.
 * **+V→N	**
 * **+V→V	**
 * **+V→A	**
 * **+Prop→A	**
 * **+Der	**
 * **+Der/xxx**
 **+Der/JA**	NomAg
 **+Der/minE** NomAct
 **+Der/lt	** A→Adv

# Morphophonology
To represent phonologic variations in word forms we use the following
symbols in the lexicon files:
```
  %{aä%}    — Vowel harmony with "(t)a/ä" AÄ1:a AÄ1:ä AÄ1:0
  %{ae%}   — Vowel harmony with "a/e/õ" passive tahetu
  %{aõ%}   — Vowel harmony with "a/e/õ" passive sõidõtu
  %{äe%}    — Vowel harmony with "ä/e/õ" passive
  %{eõ%}    — Vowel harmony with "e/õ"
  %{uü%}    — Vowel harmony with "u/ü"
  %{öü%}    — Vowel raising
  %{ou%}    — Vowel raising
  %{ei%}    — Vowel raising
  %{õy%}    — Vowel raising
  %{ao%}    — Vowel raising
  %{eØ%}    — ütlemä:üt%{eØ%}l  
  %{õØ%}    — ütlemä:üt%{eØ%}l  
  %{Øõ%}    — juurdlõma:juur%{dØ%}%{0õ%}l
  %{XV%}    — This is used for echoing the previous vowel
  %{XC%}    — This is used for lengthening a consonant
  %{dØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{tØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{dv%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{ij%}    ellä%{ij%}
  %{gv%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{gl%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{gØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas argnõma:ar%{gØ%}
  %{uv%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{üv%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
```


## Gemination
```
  %{hØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{jØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{kØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{lØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{mØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{nØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{pØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas oppama:o%{pØ%}pama
  %{rØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{sØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{vØ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{Øp%}    — häbü:hä%{Øp%}%{pbØ%}ü
  %{Øt%}    — koda:ko%{Øt%}%{tdØ%}a
  %{Øk%}    — nägo:nä%{Øk%}%{kgØ%}o

```

## Strong and weak
```
  %{pb%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{td%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{t́d́%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{kg%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{bv%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas närväs:när%{bv%}ä%{sØ%}
  %{dr%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas parras:par%{dr%}a%{sØ%}
  %{bm%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas lammas:lam%{bm%}a%{sØ%}
  %{dn%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas lammas:lam%{bm%}a%{sØ%}
  %{dl%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas lammas:lam%{bm%}a%{sØ%}
  %{pbØ%}   — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{pbv%}   — tõbi: tõvõ tõpõ tõppõ
  %{tdØ%}   — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{kgØ%}   — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{jiØ%}   — HJK and KimmoK ideas vari:var%{jiØ%}o
  %{qmn%}   — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{qn%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{dd́Ø%}   
  %{dd́n%}   
  %{dd́r%}   
  %{dd́v%}   
  %{dd́Ø%}   
  %{gǵv%}   
  %{gǵØ%}   
  %{tt́d%}   
  %{tt́Ø%}    täh%{tt́Ø%}
  %{kḱg%}   
  %{kḱØ%}   
  %{pṕb%}   
  %{pṕØ%}   

```

## Palatalization
```
  %{bb́%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{dd́%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{ff́%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{gǵ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{hh́%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{kḱ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{lĺ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{mḿ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{nń%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{pṕ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{rŕ%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{sś%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{tt́%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{vv́%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{zź%}    — HJK and KimmoK ideas kana:ka%{nØ%}na
  %{dd́n%}  
```

 **%^I7**  This appears in stem vaoma:va%^I7o for vaio
 **%^K7**  This appears in stem väemä:vä%^K7e for väkeq
 **%^V7**  This appears in stem häömä:hä%^V7ö for hävvü
 **%^T7**  This appears in stem kaoma:ka%^T7o for katoq
 **%^Y7**  This appears for syna = s%^Y7na and is rendered as õ in the norm

And following triggers to control variation
 %^ErrorBack	 +Err/Orth+Clt:%>kinaq in front harmony context BHARM disallowance

  %^CC2C 	 att%^CC2C%>m%{aä%} atma
  %^OO2Õ		  joo%^OO2Õ%>i:j0õ0%>i
  %^PSS		 vowel in passive tahetu, sõidõtu, eletü

  %^ÄI2ÄÄ  päiv%^ÄI2ÄÄ%>ä: päävä
  %{PrsSg1%}  — this helps with %{eõ%}:i̬

 %^StrD2T  This changes g,d,b, => k,t,p

 **%^VowRM** this will remove stem final vowel
 **%^CnsRM** this will remove stem final consonant tervüs:tervü
 **%^StrGStem** This strengthens "perädü" to "perätüt"
 **%^XStrGStem** This extra-strengthens "sõda" to "sõtta"
  **%^NoGrad**
 **%^WGStem** This weakens
  %^G1	       — This is used with %{pØ%} %{pbØ%} for 0 0, also t, k
  %^G2	       — This is used with %{pØ%} %{pbØ%} for 0 b, also t, k
  %^G3	       — This is used with %{pØ%} %{pbØ%} for 0 p, also t, k
  %^G4	       — This is used with %{pØ%} %{pbØ%} for p p, also t, k
 %^ShortGStem   — This shortens "pu%{tØ%}tu" to "putma", an orthographic convension
 %^LongGStem     — This lengthens "pu%{tØ%}tu" to "puttuq"
  %^Pen	       This moves us to penultimate coda
  %^PAL	       — Palatalization
  %^NoPAL       — NoPalatalization

 %^PenWGStem  This weakens "kipõń" to "kibõna"

 **%^PenVowRM** syncope tapõld : taplõma

 **%^D2S	** käsi, susi
 %^TS2S  The -ts- => -s-
 %^I2J  The i => j change

 **%^PLPRT** The a:o attested in Plural kana:kanno and prt
 **%^VOWRaise** Raises vowel
 **%^VOWLower** Lowers vowel
 **%^XLowerVow** Lowers vowel two levels
 **%^VOWLowerDelab** Lowers vowel and delabializes it
 **%^XLowerVowDelab** Lowers vowel two levels and delabializes it
 %^U2E  lowers u:õ and ü:e delabializes and lowers
 %^U2A  lowers u:a and ü:ä delabializes and lowers

* **+Gram/TAbbr**:  Transitive abbreviation (it needs an argument)
* **+Gram/NoAbbr**:  Intransitive abbreviations that are homonymous
   with more frequent words. They should only be considered
   abbreviations in the middle of a sentence.
* **+Gram/TNumAbbr**:  Transitive abbreviation if the following
            constituent is numeric
* **+Gram/NumNoAbbr**:  Transitive abbreviations for which numerals
are complements and normal words. The abbreviation usage
is less common and thus only the occurences in the middle of
the sentence can be considered as true cases.
* **+Gram/TIAbbr**:  Both transitive and intransitive abbreviation
* **+Gram/IAbbr**:  Intransitive abbreviation (it takes no argument)
* **+Gram/3syll**: trisyllabic verbs
 ; +Gram/Superl 
 ; +Gram/Comp 



# Oahpa Place names and case used 
* **+%<plc_ine%>**:  Ine, Ill, Ela
* **+%<plc_ade%>**:  Ade, All, Abl
* **+%<pcl_pääl%>**:  pääl, pääle, päält


# Flag diacritics
We have manually optimised the structure of our lexicon using the following
flag diacritics to restrict morhpological combinatorics - only allow
compounds with verbs if the verb is further derived into a noun again:
|  **@P.NeedNoun.ON@** | (Dis)allow compounds with verbs unless nominalised
|  **@D.NeedNoun.ON@** | (Dis)allow compounds with verbs unless nominalised
|  **@C.NeedNoun@** | (Dis)allow compounds with verbs unless nominalised

For languages that allow compounding, the following flag diacritics are needed
to control position-based compounding restrictions for nominals. Their use is
handled automatically if combined with +CmpN/xxx tags. If not used, they will
do no harm.
|  **@P.CmpFrst.FALSE@** | Require that words tagged as such only appear first
|  **@D.CmpPref.TRUE@** | Block such words from entering ENDLEX
|  **@P.CmpPref.FALSE@** | Block these words from making further compounds
|  **@D.CmpLast.TRUE@** | Block such words from entering R
|  **@D.CmpNone.TRUE@** | Combines with the next tag to prohibit compounding
|  **@U.CmpNone.FALSE@** | Combines with the prev tag to prohibit compounding
|  **@P.CmpOnly.TRUE@** | Sets a flag to indicate that the word has passed R
|  **@D.CmpOnly.FALSE@** | Disallow words coming directly from root.

Use the following flag diacritics to control downcasing of derived proper
nouns (e.g. Finnish Pariisi -> pariisilainen). See e.g. North Sámi for how to use
these flags. There exists a ready-made regex that will do the actual down-casing
given the proper use of these flags.

|  **@U.Cap.Obl@** | Allowing downcasing of derived names: deatnulasj.
|  **@U.Cap.Opt@** | Allowing downcasing of derived names: deatnulasj.

|  **@U.Case.Abe@	** | Abessive
|  **@U.Case.Abl@	** | Ablative
|  **@U.Case.Ade@	** | Adessive
|  **@U.Case.All@	** | Allative
|  **@U.Case.Com@	** | Comitative
|  **@U.Case.Ela@	** | Elative
|  **@U.Case.Gen@	** | Genitive
|  **@U.Case.Ill@	** | Illative
|  **@U.Case.Ine@	** | Inessive
|  **@U.Case.Nom@	** | Nominative
|  **@U.Case.Par@	** | Partitive
|  **@U.Case.Ter@	** | Terminative
|  **@U.Case.Tra@	** | Translative

|  **@U.Number.Pl@	** | Plural
|  **@U.Number.Sg@	** | Singular

# The Root lexicon


The word forms in the Võro language start from the lexeme roots of basic
word classes, or optionally from prefixes:
 * **adpositions ;	**
 * **adverbs ;		**
 * **conjunctors ;	**
 * **interjections ;**
 * **pronouns	;		**
 * **PronounTypes	;		**
 * **Punctuation ;	**
 * **Symbols ;	**
 * **numerals	;	**
look at verb_newwords.lexc

 * **Exceptions ;		**
 * **Abbreviation ;	**
 * **Acronym ;**

Incoming
 * __A_NEWWORDS ;__
 * __ADP_NEWWORDS ;__
 * __ADV_NEWWORDS ;__ 
 * __DET_NEWWORDS ;__
 * __INTERJ_NEWWORDS ;__
 * __N_NEWWORDS ;__
 * __@U.Cap.Obl@ PROP_NEWWORDS ;__
 * __@U.Cap.Opt@ PROP_NEWWORDS ;__
 * __V_NEWWORDS ;__
 * **GenitiveAttributes ;** Borrowed from experimental_languages est



less complex word classes
